Coordinates: 37°52′51.35″N 122°15′52.47″W﻿ / ﻿37.8809306°N 122.2645750°W﻿ / 37.8809306; -122.2645750
The Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology (DSPT) is a Roman Catholic graduate school in Berkeley, California. It offers certificate and degree programs to lay men and women, Catholics and non-Catholics, as well as training for the Dominicans of the Western Province. DSPT is the only graduate level theological institution in the United States to offer a concurrent degree, 2 MAs with 1 thesis, in philosophy and theology.
DSPT is a member of the interfaith Graduate Theological Union (GTU) and an affiliate of the University of California Berkeley. It is sponsored by the Dominican Order.
In 1851, Dominican missionary Francis Sadoc Vilarrasa and six Dominican novices arrived in Monterey, California, and established a school to prepare the young men for the priesthood. In 1854, the school moved to Benicia, but the traditional Dominican attraction to universities led the Order to seek a location closer to the University of California, Berkeley. In 1932, the Dominicans incorporated the school as the College of St. Albert the Great in Oakland, just a couple miles from the UC Berkeley campus. In 1964, the college received accreditation from the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC) and in the fall of 1964 the college joined the nascent GTU, becoming the first Roman Catholic school to participate in that consortium. In 1978, the college began "doing business as" the Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology.
From the time of its association with the GTU, the school had leased space for classes and faculty offices. In 2004, the school purchased a permanent campus site in Berkeley near other GTU member schools and began offering classes at the new site in September 2006.
DSPT offers the following degree and certificate programs:
The Dominican School also accepts non-degree students in its Special Student program. DSPT offers a variety of academic concentrations, including Thomistic Studies and Religion and the Arts.
The school is chartered by the State of California as a degree-granting institution of higher education. The school's programs are accredited by The Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC) and by the Association of Theological Schools (ATS). DSPT is established by the Master of the Order of Preachers (Dominican Order) as a Center of Studies for the Order.
Members of the DSPT College of Fellows are lay Catholics who are distinguished in their careers who serve as a resource to DSPT by gathering every year on campus to consider the questions of our day in light of their expertise in politics, government, law, economics, business, the sciences, bio-medical research, technology, media, and the arts. Members also participate in student events on campus throughout the academic year. The College of Fellows was formed in 2006 under the leadership of the President, Michael Sweeney, OP.
As a small collegial institution rooted in the Roman Catholic tradition, DSPT is situated within the larger, theologically-diverse GTU community, and, more broadly, just up the hill from the University of California at Berkeley. The school is just a few blocks from the Gourmet Ghetto and the original store of Peet's Coffee and Tea.